Warm greetings, friends. Thanks for joining. Thank you all. So if we all just take a moment
to refresh and really reconnect to our motivation of Bodhichitta and really try to strongly bring
out this wish that what we're doing now, reflecting on the teachings and putting them into practice
,
that this very moment and this time together becomes the cause of the happiness and enlightenment
of all beings everywhere. So we'll just refresh that motivation and that view just for a few
minutes.
So there's a single moment that we're all heading towards. And that's the moment of
dying. So Buddhists tend to not shy away from this too much because the Buddha taught so
much about impermanence. And this is a very big impermanence that each of us have to go
through eventually. And the real certain thing about dying for each of us is that it is going
to happen soon. The older I get, which is just little by little, and when I talk with
friends who are older than me, for a lot of them it seems like time passes faster as they
get older. And there's a sense of where did it all go? It happened so fast. So this big
disruption is coming. And we know it. Kind of on the surface of our brains, we kind of
have that knowledge. This time's coming. This moment's coming. And essentially kind of what
is this moment? It's really the big loss of control. Where we can't control our body,
we can't control where we're at, who's around us. Since faculties start getting jittery.
And I'm no expert by any means on this moment of death. I don't know anything about it.
I'm scared about it. I fear that big disruption. But the one thing the Buddha taught that was
really clear about death is that same process of dissolution or dying is the very same process
that's happening right now. As one moment moves into the next, as our thoughts become
new thoughts, our emotions become new emotions, as the seasons change, as the days go by,
as we fall asleep and then wake up, it's basically the same sequence of cause and effect happening.
And in one way, we can look at this as a big problem. This constantly being disrupted,
interrupted. That I'm trying to have kind of control over this experience and find some
sense of happiness and a sense of purpose and well-being. And it keeps getting interrupted
by life happening to me. That I can't control. And then the big disruption of, "Oh, I can't
move. Oh, everything's happening. Oh, everything's shutting down." Then what do I have control
over then? It's my mind. That's it. And the Buddha taught this same situation is happening
right now. The only thing I really have conscious control over is my mind. If I train it, if
I investigate it, if I look closely at what is this awareness happening right now, right
now, what is going on in my mind? That's where there's control. We have very conscious ability
to choose how we engage with this experience, this world that's really out of our control.
So samsara is this process that's completely infallible, this sequence of cause and effect.
And it's like a perfect infinite machine that there's not an error. It's like infallible.
But the problem is there's so many moving parts. And we only see a piece of it. And so
all the things we don't see of cause and effect, they feel like we're getting hurt, or we're
losing control, or we're disrupted, or what we want to happen isn't happening, or what
we didn't want to happen happens. And it's because we have a little window of what we're
paying attention to of this vast sequence of cause, conditions, and effects. And so you
could say, like, in one way, samsara is this perfect, intricate system of cause and effect
that never misses a beat. But experience from my small view, it feels like it's uninterrupted
disruptions or interruptions of what I want to happen. Again and again and again, I don't
get what I want. I feel tired. I feel annoyed. The weather, it rained on my parade, whatever.
Or something really bad happened. It's really very tragic. It's genuinely just heartbreaking.
So suffering, samsara is suffering. I mean, nowadays, maybe it'd be like we could define
that in a way. Samsara is traumatic. It's this endless, ongoing repetition of being
hurt, being wounded, of me getting hurt. And so then the task for each of us as practitioners,
if we consider ourselves practitioners, we're trying to study, contemplate, and practice
as Buddhists within the Buddhist teachings, according to the guidance of the Buddha and
the lineage masters and our personal teacher. Then there's two ways we can utilize this
disruption of life, of each moment becoming a new moment. And we don't know what's really
going to happen. We really don't know. Because we don't see big enough. We don't see enough
of the causes, conditions, and effects closely enough. So we keep getting the rug pulled
out from under us. Because we just don't see clearly enough yet. And there's two options.
We can use practice to disrupt our old negative habits. Or we can let our old negative habits
disrupt our practice. I'm assuming that people have received some Dharma teachings before
hearing this. So we have some teachings under our belts. We know some basic Buddha's fundamentals,
the Four Noble Truths, and bodhicitta, and we're coming to an Andro session. And I mean,
there's such a wealth of Dharma teachings out there. We have all these tools. So we
can use these tools. We can use these views in this system, this guidance from these sublime
immaculate beings who actually gained complete conscious attention of all causes, conditions,
and effects. They became enlightened. We can use their guidance and their tools to completely
disrupt our old negative habits, the habit of me against everything. And little by little,
we can ease up that mistaken perception. It's not me versus everything. I'm a big part of
this fast flowing system. And so are you. Each of us are. We're not against it. We're
always with it. But when we take a small piece of it and try to hold on to it in a stuck
fixed way, it seems like everything's against us. So we can use these tools, these instructions
in this guidance and Nundra practice. And each day, each moment, if we get really kind
of like burned with our hair on fire to really want to use this situation to disrupt our
old negative habits that keep causing us suffering, sense of being harmed, we can use this to
completely interrupt and finally break through all of our old destructive habits that we
ourselves have ingrained again and again and again over a long period of time. Or we can
kind of use, you know, not use the techniques in the practice and kind of like get bored
with them or take them for granted or kind of just, you know, it can become another thing
we do, you know, the practice can be another way that I, you know, another badge I have,
which is spiritual materialism. It can be another way that I avoid dealing with my life.
We can be a bypassing thing. One more way where I'm not actually going to intend to
like what's going on in me, my emotions and my thoughts. Oh, I'll just practice now and
not deal with the emotion stuff that's happening. Or we can avoid it, avoid our pain, avoid
the suffering of samsara with practice. Or we can use our practice to actually look at
the suffering. How is this working? Why, what is going on in this moment of my mind suffering
now? And we can disrupt the tense grasping mind onto this pain and this suffering and
this big drama that I have really a lot invested in. And so we're very fortunate as Buddhist
practitioners. We have this in all these systems of techniques that when things really break
down, we don't have to break down to. We can really break through. We can use a disruption,
use an interruption instead of breaking down and getting more broken. We can use it to
break through that sense of like, why isn't this going my way? And instead we can listen
like what is happening now can really look clearly. And we can develop this ability more
and more over time to this surrender. We can surrender ourselves to the teachings. So the
teachings become something that we merge with little by little, not that we have as another
tool, not as another, just another thing happening in our life. So it becomes our life that really
try to blend our life with Dharma over time, little by little by little over a long period
of time, because we have a lot of old habits that we have to loosen. We have a lot of new
good habits we need to cultivate. And we have a lot of relaxing to do. Don't we? I do. Because
I'm constantly trying to set up the perfect thing. And then Oh, it doesn't happen. Or I
fall asleep. And then I wake up a new day. Oh, no, it's not over. So those are cancer
which he said something that was really helpful in a teaching called it depends years ago
from New York City. He said the basic definition of a bodhisattva view is there's no finish
line. We give up the idea of just wanting to be done with it all. Instead, we've really
curiously look at it, we try to open it up, we see, wow, this is really incredible and
amazing what's happening here. And all these beings are just so hurting. Aren't they? When
we look out, I mean, all it is is just constantly just look in any portal of looking through
the world. There's so much hurt. And people who really need support, you know, not really.
There's so much distress. There's so much samsara in samsara. And we can use these teachings
to break through our habits to try to avoid it all. Or to be overwhelmed by it. Or just
shut down and close off. We can use the teachings to actually lean into it. This is the courageous
bodhisattva view. Little by little, little baby bodhisattvas. Little, little, baby bodhisattvas.
We're trying to develop our capacities for bigger view, for more courage, more courage,
more strength, more laughter. More deep heartache that actually, like, really practically in
really grounded ways is what can I do to help? What's available to me? How can I help you?
How can I relieve your suffering? Even if it's practice, right? It doesn't have to just
be money or tangible. It doesn't have to be everything in the degenerate age now is tangible.
It's very obvious. Like death. Death is big, obvious disruption. But all these micro moments
of disruption, of interruption, of all these things where the ego doesn't get its way,
doesn't get its way, doesn't get its way. Oh, then it really doesn't get its way. And
then we can break down and freak out. Or we can relax and actually apply the teachings
that we've been given. So that's kind of all available for us now. And there's no way around
doing it little by little, like each moment renews itself and each time of each moment
of mind. We have the opportunity to start again, start new, be fresh, fresh, fresh. And
that's disrupting this old habits. Same old, same old, same old, new, same old, same old,
same old. There's nothing new under the sun. I'm little old me. This is just a bad, big
bad world. We can disrupt that and interrupt that and see a little more clearly. So as
Buddhists, we're very fortunate. We have this giant spectrum of teachings the Buddha gave,
these fundamental teachings. And the thing now is we can use these tiny disruptions now,
like day going into night and night going into day. These little interruptions of things
happening that we don't like. Oh, I have a foot ache. Oh, I have a bad mood come up.
Oh, someone said something. We can use these little things that rub us and kind of little,
they're like little bits of suffering. They're not so overwhelming. And then we can use that
to train our mind a little bit of a friction. And then we can, ha, what did the Buddha say?
What did my teacher say? What teachings have I received? And gradually with these little
interruptions or disruptions, we can retrain our minds. We don't need to wait for a big
disruption to happen before we actually do some preparation. Right now, when it's a little
easier, when a little more is on our side, we can train ourselves and open ourselves
and connect to our compassion and our love and our kindness and our gratitude for these
lineage teachings. So in a basic way, it says, if today's the day to die, am I ready? And
we can ask ourselves that, am I ready today? And the Buddha said we should ask ourselves
that. These great Zen practitioners, every night they turn clean out their eating bowl,
turn it upside down, set up their surroundings. So if they die that night, everything's nice
and refreshed for the next person to come in and use their things. And there's no need
to make a big fuss over all the loose strands they left around. They leave it clean. And
we can do that with our practice, doing this nundro, doing regular practice, reconnecting
to our motivation in simple, simple ways that make such a big difference over time. So what
are the fundamentals? If all of a sudden I never saw a Dharma book again, if all of a
sudden there was no Sangha around, if all of a sudden it was my mind started getting
little like, you know, fuzzier, can't remember the names as well. I don't really remember
when that happened. You know, this is life, right? Do I know enough Dharma that in this
day, today, if I go, am I ready? So what are the fundamentals? And that's what nundro is
all about. We put the time in to really get a supple flexibility that's really kind of
rooted in there of like the fundamentals of Buddha Dharma. Foundation of Buddhism, Sutra
Mahayana, Tantra Mahayana, again and again and again and again. We touch base with these
fundamentals, four noble truths, four mind turnings, kindness, renouncing causes of suffering.
Sutra Mahayana, bodhicitta, relative bodhicitta, four balanced thoughts, six parameter practices,
absolute bodhicitta, lack of intrinsic inherent existence, going beyond all conceptual designations
and limitations. Tantra Mahayana, pure perception, devotion, deep abiding, close feeling to the
lineage, to the teaching, to the teachers, to the Buddha, to the Dharma, to the Sangha.
A deep trust in ourselves, Vajra pride, a complete certainty conviction that this is
good. I am good. You are good. This is workable. And then in more tantrics, you know, scenario
or kind of languaging, there's nothing to be done. It's nothing to be fixed. It is all
completely achieved. It's done. There's no fire to put out. This utter resolute conviction
in the purity of everything. I don't have any of these fundamentals, but these are basic
fundamentals. We've heard them so many times from our very kind and precious amazing extraordinary
teachers. And in their book, Illuminating the Path, and His Holiness Dhujhir Rinpoche,
Jujhir Yashidorje's book, On a Torch Lighting the Way to Freedom, all these nundra instructions,
we have them right at our fingertips and we can utilize them. These fundamentals are,
really all these masters have just repeated these time and again. And it's what they'll
keep repeating. Fundamental means essential. So like when things get shaky and something
gets disrupted and something gets interrupted, what are the fundamentals? Because if it's
not just if emotionally or if like in a more kind of intuitive or embodied sense, if I'm
not yet in a flexible relaxed state that's not fight flight freeze or whatever, but it's
more like, ooh, something new. If I haven't yet developed that kind of training, which
I haven't, then cognitively, conceptually, intellectually, according to a study, study
and contemplation, intellectual, what are the frameworks that I really need to reactivate
now? If I'm freaking out, what are the basics? Because the Buddha taught all of them. And
I just went through as a quick list and like, we'll hear, hopefully if we're so fortunate,
years and years and years, more on these teachings, unpacking them and connecting with one another
to really bring these alive, to light ourselves up with these same fundamental teachings,
bhorichitta, renunciation, pure perception. Every time a teaching begins, same fundamentals,
just like Lama Lai said last week, same fundamentals. We need to have them become so rote, so
habitual
that it's just like, we're right and ready. Something bad happens. We don't know what
to do. They can just, they're right there. Like as practitioners, we really need to kind
of take that on as a challenge. What are the fundamentals, even just intellectually, that
right now, if I die today, bring this to my mind, bring this to my mind, connect in this
way, release this, let go of that, forgive, relax. And then we apply them. And that's
what we're doing all of these sessions. The beautiful thing of Buddha Dharma is it's an
entire system that has all these fundamentals that work together. And as our mind opens
up and refines, the system opens up and refines. And in the end, the system dissolves itself.
In the end, we become the Dharma. The Dharma is not there, and we're here. The Dharma is
how we are, because that's what the nature is, because eventually we're just natural
and we go with it. We don't need a system anymore once we become fully natural or enlightened.
So in the meantime, on the path, there's all these steps. And step one of this nundra path,
of course, we have to turn our mind to be interested in these things. We're so kind,
the Buddha said, there's a problem here. Suffering. That was so kind of the Buddha. So many people
don't admit the problem. It's so refreshing to hear an honest, straightforward admission.
It's just something's really wrong, you know? What can I do? Then he says, all these things
we can do. What can I rely on? Whatever change happens, change, change, change, change, change.
What can I rely on? What is the reliable refuge? What will protect my baby bodhicitta? Because
I need to protect my little cute, sweet baby bodhicitta. It's so little cute, baby bodhicitta,
but it's such a little baby. And that needs to be touched. It needs to be cared for and
fed properly. And it needs to go to bed on time and all the things. It needs regularity.
It needs protection. It needs security. Not in a sense of exclusivity. Oh, this is the
only path. Oh, this is the best path. Oh, my way is the right way. Nothing like that.
But for me right now, for my little tiny baby bodhicitta, oh, this is what it really needs
to be soothed, to be encouraged, to be challenged just enough that it can take on, that it can
grow, that it can learn to adapt. This system keeps correcting itself, right? Remember what
she said the other day? What is a dharma? To correct. To hold ourself in one way, and
this is just, I'm extrapolating, to hold ourself accountable. We are fundamentally good. This
situation is workable. I have so much to offer the world, and so do you, and so do all of
us, and we need to help each other, and we need to learn from each other, and we need
to work together. And we can use this, all this imbalance, the fragility of samsara,
we can use this to our advantage to completely break through this habitual mind that keeps
obsessing over what it can't control. And so it looks out, and looks out, and looks out.
And just, I forget, to look, what's my mind? What is my awareness doing now? I have full
conscious capacity to change its direction now, to actually go for refuge in something
reliable. Buddha dharma sangha. Turn my mind towards that, and then to keep looking. Not
just look once, or look a few times, or look, and then feel like I've looked enough, and
then forget, and then just take for granted and gloss over. But to keep it fresh and active.
This contemplation, different masters have said this, study, contemplation, wisdom of
meditation, study, contemplation, meditation. For a lot of us, the one that's most weak
is contemplation. We start with saying, I don't know, you know, help me, I want to learn.
So we study, we receive teachings, we hear, we listen. We want to get to the point in
meditation where we have a clear conviction of a fresh wakefulness, regardless of what's
happening. That's certainty wisdom. That's what we're aiming for. That's what each session
we try to, we dissolve the refuge tree into ourselves, and we just try to abide in complete
certainty wisdom of the nature. So every session undoes itself, and we just are left free and
easy and open and fresh. The toolbox dissolves itself into what's natural. But in the meantime,
on the path, we really have to keep testing it, keep trying it, keep looking, keep unpacking,
keep opening, keep engaging it, keep making it a lived experience, this contemplation.
Because when really big disruptions happen, and this is the age of disruptions, it's the
degenerate age. That's, I mean, it's just one of those heart, really heartbreaking things,
it doesn't get better until Buddha Maitreya comes, gets more narrow minded. But we don't
have to follow that current, more fighting, we don't have to do that, more weapons, we
don't have to do that, more competitiveness that just doesn't think twice about someone
else. We can love, and we have compassion, and we can really free ourselves. We can use
this, wow, this really strong catch that happens in our mind, and I'm wrapping up now, this
strong catch that happens in our mind that Vajrayana is based on, a total disruption
of our normal habitual mind. And the really good thing about disruption is it allows for
a gap. Something unknown happens, we didn't expect it, and instead of immediately pushing
against it, we can be in the gap, mind the gap, and we can use that fresh openness, the
fresh wakefulness as our practice. And we have this whole system of techniques, including
this dujum teresar nundro, including all these lojang mind training slogans that are so easy
to memorize that we can just have ready to bring out when adversity happens. We can really
just have them. We don't need 1,000, we need 5, we need 3, we need 1, we need Buddha dharmasanga,
and we really need to keep utilizing them, keep seeing the richness that they offer.
And then we really get refined, and we start to really blend with Buddha dharmasanga more.
We don't doubt it so much. We see that it works as everything's falling apart, we see this
is reliable, Buddha dharmasanga. My mind has a Buddha dharmasanga in it, outside there's
a Buddha dharmasanga, and we always have both, this always available, reliable refuge for
all of us, if we just turn our minds toward it. And we do that with practice, we do that
with study, we do that with contemplation. So I say that kind of just as a really basic
reminder myself, this is all basically me just projecting all my things I need to do
out into my voice, into saying, "Dracwa, this is really what you need to do." And it is,
and I know it is. And so there's the rub. I know the steps that need to be taken in
Kenshin, Paul, and Shera Rinpoche and Kempo Seo and Don Rinpoche. They really said that
clearly years ago. In a Pema Mandala interview, they're going through Longchampa's Five Strengths
of a Practitioner. They said at that time, we know the problem isn't that we don't have
enough knowledge. Problem is we're a little weak with practice. We don't apply it so much.
And so what are the ways that we can actually kind of like apply the teaching, apply the
teaching? What are the fundamentals? We have to know it. Then we have to really keep trying
to taste them, try them out, apply them, and let it change us. And then we won't see disruptions
and interruptions and kind of as being such a threat or something we don't like, but more
is the opportunity to connect even more with Dharma and become the Dharma more. Thank you.